TEP 0109: Better structured provenance retrieval in Tekton Chains (#697)
tektoncd/community: teps/0109-better-structured-provenance-retrieval-in-tekton-chains.md

          digest:
            type: string
          alg:
            type: string
    ```
    And its corresponding TaskRun example will be like:
    ```
    TaskRun:
      ...
      params:
        - name: CHAINS-VCS
          value:
            src_type: git
            uri: git+https://github.com/foo/bar.git
            alg: sha256
            digest: abc
      ...
      results:
        - name: CHAINS-OCI_IMAGE
          value:
            name: gcr.io/somerepo/someimage
            digest: abc
            alg: sha256
    ```

2. Use Perforce and images as sources, and generates in-toto provenance for a TaskRun that builds a Python wheel.

    TODO: Example to be added 

### Requirements

- Able to structurally retrieve provenance info from TaskRun and produces currently supported provenance formats once a TaskRun is finished
- Based on SLSA L2 requirements, the provenance must provide the location of source code in version control and the provenance MUST identify the output artifact via at least one cryptographic hash.
- If a TaskRun is within a PipelineRun, the TaskRun’s provenance can be produced between the time that when one TaskRun is finished

## Proposal

> Currently we are using type-hinting to retrieve needed provenance info from TaskRun’s params and results. The proposal aims to leverage the new features of structured params and results described in [TEP 0075](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/teps/0075-object-param-and-result-types.md) and [TEP 0076](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/teps/0076-array-result-types.md) and support better structured provenance retrieval for inputs and artifacts to make the current type-hinting easier. This proposal is focused on the use cases for generation in-toto attestations, as other types of attestations don’t need the TaskRun params and results.

Author: Can you explain a bit more about ideas of such tool? Do you mean we provide an image for users or a piece of module in Chains?

> Currently we are using type-hinting to retrieve needed provenance info from TaskRun’s params and results. The proposal aims to leverage the new features of structured params and results described in [TEP 0075](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/teps/0075-object-param-and-result-types.md) and [TEP 0076](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/teps/0076-array-result-types.md) and support better structured provenance retrieval for inputs and artifacts to make the current type-hinting easier. This proposal is focused on the use cases for generation in-toto attestations, as other types of attestations don’t need the TaskRun params and results.

Reviewer: In my mind tool == any task (i.e. a git task). The Tasks would need to be responsible for outputting the relevant provenance for their given artifact type.

Chains wouldn't need to be aware of any particular tasks/images - it would just consume the provenance output for each task (similar to the result based mechanism it uses today).

> Currently we are using type-hinting to retrieve needed provenance info from TaskRun’s params and results. The proposal aims to leverage the new features of structured params and results described in [TEP 0075](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/teps/0075-object-param-and-result-types.md) and [TEP 0076](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/teps/0076-array-result-types.md) and support better structured provenance retrieval for inputs and artifacts to make the current type-hinting easier. This proposal is focused on the use cases for generation in-toto attestations, as other types of attestations don’t need the TaskRun params and results.

Author: To reflect what we discussed offline, I updated the doc in proposal section. I added flexibility that the provenance can come from results and other new fields that's only for trusted tasks

> Currently we are using type-hinting to retrieve needed provenance info from TaskRun’s params and results. The proposal aims to leverage the new features of structured params and results described in [TEP 0075](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/teps/0075-object-param-and-result-types.md) and [TEP 0076](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/teps/0076-array-result-types.md) and support better structured provenance retrieval for inputs and artifacts to make the current type-hinting easier. This proposal is focused on the use cases for generation in-toto attestations, as other types of attestations don’t need the TaskRun params and results.

Reviewer 2: I like the idea of having something that generates the structure response because it allows users to extend support for a particular VCS without having to make any changes to Chains. It's just another Task that needs to be written.

With [TEP-84](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/teps/0084-endtoend-provenance-collection.md) in place, post-build policies can be put in place to ensure that the Task that produced the VCS information is trusted.

Tekton Chains will follow [TEP 0075](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/teps/0075-object-param-and-result-types.md) and [TEP 0076](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/teps/0076-array-result-types.md) and support the sets of json schemas and described in the documents. In this proposal, the expected formats of params and results are also defined.

### Notes and Caveats

When these well defined structures grow as richer provenance are pursued, the size of the structure can eventually grow beyong the limit of the container termination message. [TEP 0086](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/pull/521) is addressing this issue.

## Design Details

### Signable Targets

All signable targets should be provided in a structure that is well defined in the proposal. If any field is missed, the signable targets will be skipped and an error will be thrown.

#### Version Control Sources

> Based on the use cases and data storage within provenance described above, it makes sense to have the source object to be the following because all version control sources will be grinded down into the requirements in the Predicate’s materials:

Reviewer: Just to be explicit here, this isn't a new type we're inventing here right? What we're really trying to do is standardize on SLSA's `materials` field and defintion?

Author: Yes. They are not invented from here - these structures are similar because they follow the standards of `materials` in SLSA

Reviewer: Since theses are all just variants of the same message schema, perhaps it would make more sense to just define 1 result type and list the various usages (e.g. git, oci, python, ...) under an examples section?

```
  ...
  - name: CHAINS-VCS
    type: object
    description: |
      The source distribution
      * uri: resource uri of the git commit
      * digest: revision digest
      * alg: digest algorithm: sha256 etc.
      * src_type: source VCS type: git, hg, etc.
    properties:
    src_type:
      type: string
    uri:
      type: string
    alg:
      type: string
    digest:
      type: string
```

> The required formats for src_type is one of `git`, `hg`, `svc`, `baz`, `cvs`, `perforce`. The source types can be easily extended when more VCS are supported. The required formats for uri should follow [ResourceURI](https://github.com/in-toto/attestation/blob/main/spec/field_types.md#field-type-definitions). The required format for alg is one of pre-defined algorithm names in intoto attestation [field type definitions](https://github.com/in-toto/attestation/blob/main/spec/field_types.md#field-type-definitions). The digest is the revision digest.

Reviewer: Is there a reason why we need to constrain the source type? 👀

Author: Ah maybe my wording is hinting this, but our source types are not constrained. This can be extended later. I changed my wording to make it clearer

#### OCI Images

OCI image sources will have the following schema:
```
...
  - name: CHAINS-OCI_IMAGE
    type: object
    description: |
      The source distribution
      * name: name of the built image
      * digest: image digest
      * alg: digest algorithm: sha256 etc.
    properties:
    name:
      type: string
    digest:
      type: string
    alg:
      type: string
```

> The `name` is the OCI image name, for example, `gcr.io/test/foo`. The `digest` will be the image digest in the form of `69e70a79f2d41ab5d637de98c1e0b055206ba40a8145e7bddb55ccc04e13cf8f`. The `alg` follows the same requirements for VCS `alg` field.

Reviewer: Same as above, this is really just standardizing on SLSA's `subject` field, right?

Author: Yep!

#### Python

TODO

#### Maven

TODO

#### Go

TODO

#### NodeJS

TODO

#### Parsing Results and Params from TaskRuns

The defined results and params are in object types, and will be retrieved from TaskRun params and results. From the syntax of how the results / params look, the type of those, whether they are strings, objects or arrays can be determined. We need to validate the targets’ structures against defined result and param structures. Taking VCS as an example, when a `CHAINS-VCS` is found, the target needs to be an object, and it has to have at least the fields in defined `CHAINS-VCS` schema: `src_type`, `uri`, `alg` and `digest`. If additional fields are in the target, they will be ignored. The field validation rule follows the same pattern of duck typing mentioned in [TEP-0075](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/teps/0075-object-param-and-result-types.md). These individual fields will also be validated against supported formats.

#### Storage of Signable Target Provenance Schema

> Each target provenance schema will be stored in a file as a serialized json object. They will be loaded and mounted into the Chains controller image at volumeMountPath, for example, `tekton/target_schemas`. A singleton variable will load them into structs for later use. The naming will be the type hinting marker. For example, VCS schema file will be called `chains-vcs` and it should be stored in the file in such format:

Reviewer: This needs more detail - volume sprawl is already a concern in Tekton, and I'd be hesitant to add more. There were interesting ideas in https://github.com/tektoncd/community/pull/521 that may be of interest here (I was particularly a fan of the OIDC based communication to tackle some of these problems).

Author: I changed it to be included in the controller image. They will be predefined json schemas living in source code.

> Each target provenance schema will be stored in a file as a serialized json object. They will be loaded and mounted into the Chains controller image at volumeMountPath, for example, `tekton/target_schemas`. A singleton variable will load them into structs for later use. The naming will be the type hinting marker. For example, VCS schema file will be called `chains-vcs` and it should be stored in the file in such format:

Reviewer: > The naming will be the type hinting 

I'd recommend against this, since if we're using results these will be user controlled values.

Possibly a crazy idea (not even 100% sold on this myself), but perhaps provenance information shouldn't belong in results and instead should be their own independent field? 🤔

Author: Updated the proposal section to reflect what we discussed

```
subjects: [{"name": "us-west4-maven.pkg.dev/test-project/test-repo/com/google/guava/guava/31.0/guava-31.0.jar", "digest": {"sha256": "abc"}}
{"name": "us-west4-maven.pkg.dev/test-project/test-repo/com/google/guava/guava/31.0/guava-31.0.pom", "digest": {"sha256": "def"}}
{"name": "us-west4-maven.pkg.dev/test-project/test-repo/com/google/guava/guava/31.0/guava-31.0-sources.jar", "digest": {"sha256": "xyz"}}]
...
materials: [{
  // The git repo that contains the build.yaml referenced above.
  "uri": "http://myp4web:8080/depot/main/atlas/",
  // The resolved git commit hash reflecting the version of the repo used
  // for this build.
  "digest": {"sha1": "abc..."}
}]
```

### Requirements

- Able to structurally retrieve provenance info from TaskRun and produces currently supported in-toto provenance formats once a TaskRun is finished
- Based on SLSA L2 requirements, the provenance must provide the location of source code in version control and the provenance MUST identify the output artifact via at least one cryptographic hash.
- If a TaskRun is within a PipelineRun, the TaskRun’s provenance can be produced between the time that when one TaskRun is finished

## Proposal

> **_Please note that the below proposal will be acted as a middle ground proposal, as it on one side definitely provides more organized structure for users to provide provenance data in Tekton TaskRuns and PipelineRuns, but on the other side that it still has a bunch of trade offs that can be resolved by another proposal mentioned in Alternatives section._**

Reviewer: It might help to refocus this TEP on the desired end state, and move the middle ground impl to `Implementation Plan` and/or `Risks and Mitigations`.

We should also look out to fill out the sections for `Drawbacks` - though I think this should focus on the end goal rather than in-between steps.

For the `outputs`, we are looking at the following support, as these are the artifact types supported in Artifact Registries. However, the list should definitely be expanded as this doc is spreading the discussions in the communities to see which should be prioritized. Currently, we have the following under considerations: Python, Maven, Go, NodeJS and OCI images. Note that OCI images are the ones we currently support.

#### Concrete Use Cases
All below examples will be generating in-toto attestation.
 1. Use Git commits as sources, and generates in-toto provenance for a TaskRun that builds an image.
   
    A Task example `without` structured results and params support can be like:
    ``` yaml
    apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1beta1
    kind: Task
    spec:
      params:
        - name: CHAINS-GIT_COMMIT
          type: string
          description: git commit sha
        - name: CHAINS-GIT_URL
          type: string
          description: git commit url
        - name: FOO_IMAGE
          type: string

>         - description: artifact image

Author: Good catch!

      ...
      results:
        - name: IMAGE_DIGEST
          description: digest of image
        - name: IMAGE_URL
          description: url of image
    ```
    A Task example `with` structured results support will be like:
    ``` yaml
    apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1beta1
    kind: Task
    spec:
      ...
      results:
        - name: ARTIFACT_INPUTS
          type: array
          description: |
            Stores result names that should be captured as signable targets as "materials" in in-toto provenances in Tekton Chains.
        - name: ARTIFACT_OUTPUTs
          type: array
          description: |
            Stores result names that should be captured as signable targets as "subjects" in in-toto provenances in Tekton Chains.
        - name: git-vcs
          type: object
          description: |
            The source distribution
            * uri: resource uri of the artifact.

>             * digest: revision digest in form of algorithm:digest.

Reviewer: How are we planning to handle DigestSets?

Author: Can you provide more context here?

Reviewer: Right now we have uri as type `string`, but SLSA defines this as `map[string]string`, so this isn't compatible with the intoto spec.

Author: Ah I see your point now. If we want DigestSets to be supported in an organizational way, we need Pipeline Results to have nested objects to be supported. I added a DigestSets section in the doc

Reviewer: Do we have a way of representing variable length outputs? e.g. how the `IMAGES` field works today.

I'm trying to think through how things where we may not know the exact # of artifacts produced like multiarch images can be supported. 🤔

Author: That's a super good point! I was investigating in-toto provenance, I think `subjects` and `materials` seem not compatible with multiarch images. `DigestSets` is a `map[string]string`, but the examples in the in-toto repo only shows examples that key is an algorithm and value is the digest itself. I filed https://github.com/in-toto/attestation/issues/105 for tracking that

Author: SLSA team suggested to list them separately and add unique names for those or just add the digest for the image manifest.

>             * artifact_type: artifact type categorizes the artifacts.

Author: I added more explanations to `artifact_type` in the article. Currently I'm more using this for Chains to monitor metrics. I will mention this to SLSA folks. I also created an issue in Intoto provenance repo: https://github.com/in-toto/attestation/issues/103

>             * artifact_type: artifact type categorizes the artifacts.

Author: Updates from https://github.com/in-toto/attestation/issues/103 - pipeline authors can follow PACKAGE URL format to provide the URI, and this way it can identify the artifact type. However, consider the situation that pipeline authors can't follow the PACKAGE URL format and still want to identify the artifact type, and this `artifact_type ` field will become useful. But I would remove this field, since there is no essential reason to add the field here, and people can still provide URI in PACKAGE URL to identify the artifact type.

          properties:
            uri:
              type: string
            digest:

>               type: string

Author: Good catch!

The workflow for the targeted results in Chains is like the following:
```
(TaskRun results) —-> (Scanned by Chains controller, targets are collected) —> (Targets are parsed and validated and matched against with defined result and param structures)  —-> (Chains controller sign the signable targets and put into intoto attestations)
```
Tekton Chains will follow [TEP 0075](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/teps/0075-object-param-and-result-types.md) and [TEP 0076](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/teps/0076-array-result-types.md) and support the sets of json schemas and described in the documents. In this proposal, the expected formats of results are also defined.

> As mentioned above, the signable targets can be split into inputs (sources) and outputs (artifacts). It's important that Chains are able to determine which signable targets are inputs, and which are outputs. The signable target result names are all captured in either of the results, `ARTIFACT_INPUTS` or `ARTIFACT_OUTPUTS`, which will be two arrays storing the result names that should be captured by Tekton Chains to format in-toto provenances. `ARTIFACT_INPUTS` will be captured in `subjects` and `ARTIFACT_OUTPUTS` will be captured in `materials`.

Reviewer 3: This line says 
> `ARTIFACT_INPUTS` will be captured in `subjects` and `ARTIFACT_OUTPUTS` will be captured in `materials`.

But the example above is inconsistent. In the example, items from `ARTIFACT_INPUTS` are stored into `materials`, whereas items from `ARTIFACT_OUTPUTS` are stored into `subjects`. Which one is intended?

Also can you please help me understand a bit more about the differences between `ARTIFACT_INPUTS` and `ARTIFACT_OUTPUTS` given that they are all defined in `results`? Thanks

Author: Good catch!

Author: In terms of differences of `ARTIFACT_INPUTS` and `ARTIFACT_OUTPUTS`, they mean that whether an artifact A is used as source or materials in a pipeline in order to generate another artifact B. In this case, A is `ARTIFACT_INPUTS` and B is `ARTIFACT_OUTPUTS`

Generating the objects that satisfy these schemas, from human readable provenance metadata can be done by writing provenence data using Steps in Tasks into these schema structures in TaskRuns and populate them PipelineRuns' Results, and there is also a discussion around adding a new field `provenance` in PipelineRun and TaskRun, which only allows [trusted Tasks](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/2413ad70a742a6e9103c531e1c5788b2b392a7eb/teps/0091-verified-remote-resources.md#requirements) and Pipelines to generate provenance info in this field. Chains should be able to accomodate what is currently capable in TaskRun and PipelineRun results, and other potential new fields specifically for provenances.

### Notes and Caveats

When these well defined structures grow as richer provenance are pursued, the size of the structure can eventually grow beyond the limit of the container termination message. [TEP 0086](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/pull/521) is addressing this issue.

## Design Details

> ### Signable Targets

Reviewer: What's the difference between a signable target and an output artifact?

Author: I'm changing all wording to "signable artifacts"

### Simplicity

- Pro: the design is supporting the same sets of json schema described in TEP 75 and 76
- Pro: the provenance can be retrieved much more easily than the current type hinting method
- Con: the schema can potentially grow much richer and size limit can become a problem

### Flexibility

- Pro: when supporting new types of signable targets, the schema can be easily added.
- Con: for each new type of signable targets, the schema needs to be created individually

<!--
https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/design-principles.md#flexibility

- Are there dependencies that need to be pulled in for this proposal to work? What support or maintenance would be
required for these dependencies?
- Are we coupling two or more Tekton projects in this proposal (e.g. coupling Pipelines to Chains)?
- Are we coupling Tekton and other projects (e.g. Knative, Sigstore) in this proposal?
- What is the impact of the coupling to operators e.g. maintenance & end-to-end testing?
- Are there opinionated choices being made in this proposal? If so, are they necessary and can users extend it with
their own choices?
-->

> ### User Experience

Reviewer: Would you be able to try out and link to an example of a TaskRun that generates this kind of result output?
This will probably be a good exercise to see what's easy / hard to do as a TaskRun author. 

For example - I don't know if we have a good way of passing in result names to TaskRuns, so generating the INPUTS/OUTPUTS lists might actually be tricky to implement as an author.

Author: Added an example at https://github.com/ywluogg/oci-image-structured-results

<!--
(optional)

Consideration about the user experience. Depending on the area of change,
users may be Task and Pipeline editors, they may trigger TaskRuns and
PipelineRuns or they may be responsible for monitoring the execution of runs,
via CLI, dashboard or a monitoring system.

Consider including folks that also work on CLI and dashboard.
-->

### Performance

<!--
(optional)

Consider which use cases are impacted by this change and what are their
performance requirements.
- What impact does this change have on the start-up time and execution time
of TaskRuns and PipelineRuns?
- What impact does it have on the resource footprint of Tekton controllers
as well as TaskRuns and PipelineRuns?
-->

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Tekton ecosystem. Consider including folks that also work outside the WGs
or subproject.
- How will security be reviewed and by whom?
- How will UX be reviewed and by whom?
-->

### Drawbacks

<!--
Why should this TEP _not_ be implemented?
-->

> ## Alternatives

Author: Good point! I added a section for Run `status` in the `Alternatives`.

- What impact does this change have on the start-up time and execution time
of TaskRuns and PipelineRuns?
- What impact does it have on the resource footprint of Tekton controllers
as well as TaskRuns and PipelineRuns?
-->

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Tekton ecosystem. Consider including folks that also work outside the WGs
or subproject.
- How will security be reviewed and by whom?
- How will UX be reviewed and by whom?
-->

### Drawbacks

<!--
Why should this TEP _not_ be implemented?
-->

## Alternatives

### Inputs / Outputs Distinguishment

We can also separately collect inputs provenance from params, and outputs provenance from TaskRun results. The signable artifacts being found in params will be the inputs, and those found in TaskRun results will be the outputs. However, params are not reliable as users don't really specify those human less readable provenance metadata formats mentioned in in-toto attestations in neither PipelineRun nor TaskRun params.

### Using Run Status to generate Provenance Metadata

> Results is not an ideal place to have the provenance metadata populated for the artifacts, since Results are provided by Pipeline authors. When people are looking for provenance, the metadata being provided should ideally be trustful and unchangable after generation. How can we garantee the provenance metadata can be trusted? Assuming the Tekton Pipeline being installed and where the Runs are operated are trustful, one missing piece to comply to SLSA level L3 is that the Run yaml being submitted is a trustful config, which can be fulfilled by [TEP 091: Trusted Resource](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/pull/739). The other missing piece is that we want to make sure the generated provenance data shouldn't be changable by any untrusted threads. TaskRun and PipelineRun `status` field satisfies these needs, as only Pipeline controller is able to generate info within this field. To extend the previous trustful setup, we can allow Trusted Tasks to modify the field as well: when Trusted Tasks are being used, Pipeline Controller can verify the Trusted Tasks being used in a Run, and let Trusted Tasks to generate provenance metadata a new field under `status` fields.

Reviewer: I think the thing I like the most about not tying provenance to to results is that authors don't need to pre-declare provenance result data - a Task can simply output it without needing it to be explicitly declared in a param. This makes it easier to work with when there's a variable amount of items that will be generated, though at the cost of making it hard to be consumed by other steps (though it's unclear to me whether there's a strong requirement for this at the moment).

Author: I think if users want another step to verify if the produced result is having the correct digest or verify if the uploaded digest matches the computed digest, this becomes critical that the provenance can be consumed in another step

Author: I still find it useful to have provenance metadata retrieval being supported in results, since in status field that would require Trusted Resources, but I see circumstances that users may not be able to come all the way to support Trusted Resources. Having this supported in results can give users more flexibility to whether to choose Trusted Resources or not

Reviewer: My thinking is that Tasks could still produce output data into results - it just wouldn't be a requirement and authors can format that data however they want. The benefit is splitting the provenance data that has a predefined API that is meant to be used by other tools from Task results that are meant to be used by other human authors.

We can still expose the raw data into Tasks later on if we wanted to, but we also don't need to commit to that right now.

Author: I see! That's a good point. But how would we allow users to use Chains, if the string format type hinting is something we are looking to deprecate? I think users may still look for a way to use Chains in a more structured way without using Trusted Resources

Reviewer: > But how would we allow users to use Chains, if the string format type hinting is something we are looking to deprecate?

How confident are we in the status based provenance as the long term solution? It might make more sense to just move forward with that.
We could support a limited subset short term if needed (i.e. single, predefined artifacts) with the understanding that it's not a general purpose solution and can probably only be used in limited cases.
Since it sounds like we need Pipeline changes anyway to have a more general solution using params (i.e. object arrays), the difference between that and adding a new status field on the surface doesn't feel like that big of a delta.

> I think the field we plan to add in status requires the Task to be trusted task

Does it? It doesn't seem that much different than the parameter based approach - it just gives us a more controlled/structured location to put provenance data in Run objects.

Author: Discussed offline with @wlynch and updated a note at the top of Proposal section!

- [Implementation Plan](#implementation-plan)
  - [Test Plan](#test-plan)
  - [Infrastructure Needed](#infrastructure-needed)
  - [Upgrade and Migration Strategy](#upgrade-and-migration-strategy)
  - [Implementation Pull Requests](#implementation-pull-requests)
- [References](#references)
<!-- /toc -->

## Summary

_Recommendation_: read [TEP-0075 (object/dictionary param and result types)](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/teps/0075-object-param-and-result-types.md) and
[TEP-0076 (array support in results and indexing syntax)](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/teps/0076-array-result-types.md)
before this TEP, as this TEP builds on these two for Tekton Pipelines.

This TEP proposes expanding support of provenance metadata retrieval from Tekton Pipelines TaskRuns in Tekton Chains. The expansion enhances the metadata retrieval of various kinds of signable objects. The expansion includes support of results retrieval in types of object and array. The expansion also includes support of other artifacts that's currently not supported. The types of results will be identical to what's been implemented regarding to TEP0075 and TEP0076.

## Motivation

> With SLSA being established, there is a rise in demand for achieving richer provenance within attestations. [In-toto](https://github.com/in-toto/attestation) provides a way for supporting richer provenance inside Predicates. Tekton Chains currently supports multiple kinds of attestations and the in-toto attestation formnat is one of the popular ones in the open source community. Tekton Chains currently use [Results](https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/blob/main/docs/tasks.md#emitting-results) and [Params](https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/blob/main/docs/tasks.md#specifying-parameters) for such type of attestation generation. It uses type hinting for capturing a CI/CD pipeline's inputs and outputs’ provenance info in string formats. The concepts of `inputs` and `outputs` come from [SLSA provenence v0.2](https://slsa.dev/provenance/v0.2). As Chains is planning to support more complex provenance info and structures, the current string formatted type hinting will not accomodate the scalibilities and integretity it needs, as Pipeline didn’t provide structured provenance info generation in TaskRuns and we are capturing unstructured provenance info from TaskRuns in scattered ways. With [TEP 0075](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/teps/0075-object-param-and-result-types.md) and [TEP 0076](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/teps/0076-array-result-types.md), TaskRun can provide features of structured results and params.

Author: Done!

- Support “Dependencies complete” in SLSA
- Support nested objects in arrays in Results in Tekton Chains

### Use Cases

Before diving into the concrete use cases, a summary at the begining of this section explains the reasons that make these concrete use cases being displayed below should be considered in scope. The use cases are oriented around different types of inputs and outputs.

Ultimately, we are looking for support for as many format types of inputs and outputs as possible, but in this doc, we are going to focus on the a list that’s broadly needed.

For `inputs`, if we look at the requirements of SLSA in terms of sources, only SLSA L4 requires [Dependencies complete](https://slsa.dev/spec/v0.1/requirements#dependencies-complete). At the current point, if we only worry about the requirements lower than SLSA L4, support that covers VCS and OCI images is a good start. In in-toto provenance, all the inputs should be stored in the [materials](https://github.com/in-toto/attestation/tree/main/spec#predicate-conventions) under in-toto provenance. The required format is:

```
{
        "uri": "<URI>",
        "digest": { /* DigestSet */ }
 }
```

> The other specific requirements of these fields can be found in [in-toto attestation spec](https://github.com/in-toto/attestation/tree/main/spec). Another thing to be aware is that For `digest`, it has a key for the digest type and has a value for that key. Git, Mercurial, Bazaar and Subversion have full VCS location support. CVS, Perforce are providing this VCS location as plain URLs. For VCS, the list of VCS that the community are looking into is: Git, Mercurial, Subversion, Bazaar, CVS, Perforce. Currently Chains only supports Git revisions for VCS and OCI images as signable artifacts for inputs.

Author: Ah that was a paragraph addressing some issues in the old design for the schema. I' deleting this paragraph. Thanks for pointing this out!

For the `outputs`, we are looking at the following support, as these are the artifact types supported in Artifact Registries. However, the list should definitely be expanded as this doc is spreading the discussions in the communities to see which should be prioritized. Currently, we have the following under considerations: Python, Maven, Go, NodeJS and OCI images. Note that OCI images are the ones we currently support.

#### Concrete Use Cases

All below examples will be generating in-toto attestation.
 1. Use Git commits as sources, and generates in-toto provenance for a TaskRun that builds an image.
   

>     A Task example `without` structured results and params support can be like:

Author: Done!

It's also beneficial that the schemas defined in Chains can follow the field requirements in in-toto attestations. Currently, the type hinting is following a readable formats that users will find it more readable, such as results being populated in [upload-pypi](https://github.com/tektoncd/catalog/blob/f4708d478ee8fac6b5b68347cde087cb7c1d1b1c/task/upload-pypi/0.1/upload-pypi.yaml) and [jib-maven](https://github.com/tektoncd/catalog/blob/6a6f3543fa14d7d840fd13d19ba4452e5e319830/task/jib-maven/0.4/jib-maven.yaml) Catalog Tasks, but these gives difficulties about standarizing signable target schemas, as each signable target's metadata can be faily different from each other. For example, a Git source usually needs a git commit and revision, which are super different from what is needed for OCI images, which need image url and its digest. In-toto attestations provide a way to unify the identifiers for multiple types of signable artifacts, which is described in the [Use Cases](#use-cases).

> Generating the objects that satisfy these schemas, from human readable provenance metadata can be done by writing provenence data using Steps in Tasks into these schema structures in TaskRuns and populate them PipelineRuns' Results, and there is also a discussion around adding a new field `provenance` in PipelineRun and TaskRun, which only allows [Trusted Resources](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/2413ad70a742a6e9103c531e1c5788b2b392a7eb/teps/0091-verified-remote-resources.md#requirements) to generate provenance info in this field. Chains should be able to accomodate what is currently capable in TaskRun and PipelineRun results, and other potential new fields specifically for provenances.

Author: Done!

### Notes and Caveats

When these well defined structures grow as richer provenance are pursued, the size of the structure can eventually grow beyond the limit of the container termination message. [TEP 0086](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/pull/521) is addressing this issue.

## Design Details

### Signable Artifacts

All signable artifacts should be provided in a structure that is well defined in the proposal. If any field is missed, the signable artifacts will be skipped and an error will be thrown. The users need to follow the naming pattern in order the result objects can be captured.

As described above, users of Tekton Chains need to have two results, `ARTIFACT_INPUTS` and `ARTIFACT_OUTPUTS`, that are arrays of strings whichs stores the signable artifacts' result names:

```yaml
results:
  - name: ARTIFACT_INPUTS
    value: ["ARTIFACT-INPUT-NAME-1", "ARTIFACT-INPUT-NAME-1"]
  - name: ARTIFACT_OUTPUTS

>     value: ["ARTIFACT-OUTPUT-NAME-1"]

Author: There are multiple threads such as  #alternatives section in the TEP and https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/teps/0082-workspace-hinting.md about using a separate field for providing provenance metadata together with Trusted Resources, and the down sides for using results as future field for such purpose is not ideal. So I'm concerned that if I propose to add "signable" field in results, it may not be a future solution that we will be sticking to.

>     value: ["ARTIFACT-OUTPUT-NAME-1"]

Author: Another thing along this route could be - adding an extra key in the object, such as "artifact_type"? If the results are having this key, and the value is either "input" or "output", then this is a result that Chains is looking for. This doesn't need us to add a field in results in Pipeline.

>     value: ["ARTIFACT-OUTPUT-NAME-1"]

Reviewer: I prefer this over requiring task authors to plumb through result names, though a few caveats:

Putting data in object keys means that we're breaking from the intoto spec - e.g. what happens if a user just outputs a vanilla intoto material? Is intoto compatibility a goal for this proposal (it feels like this is what we're aiming for, but it's not explicitly called out as a goal)?

By putting the field in the result spec, this has the nice property of not having to need to modify the payload the Task needs to output (e.g. it can be a vanilla intoto spec), but if we'll need a spec change it might make more sense to just move forward with the status-based provenance.

>     value: ["ARTIFACT-OUTPUT-NAME-1"]

Author: I think having the schema being compatible with in-toto provenance should be one of the goals. I also agree that adding a field in results, which requires spec change, may not satisfy our future needs. That said, maybe keeping the results to follow naming type hinting may still be the temporary pattern we should follow before the status-based provenance being landed. WDYT @wlynch @afrittoli ?

>     value: ["ARTIFACT-OUTPUT-NAME-1"]

Reviewer: I can live with it, though I think we should change the arrays - I'm not sure if there's an easy way to have the Task provide these without hardcoding them. I don't think there's a way to derive the values from the [replacement context](https://tekton.dev/docs/pipelines/variables/#variables-available-in-a-task).

>     value: ["ARTIFACT-OUTPUT-NAME-1"]

Author: > 

Do you mean for Task authors how they can easily add those suffices?

#### Optional Alternatives for Schemas

It will be more flexible if users can define the provenance following the defined schemas, but don't necessarily have to follow the naming patterns. Users can provide a result in array type, with name consistent with the signable target, and have a list of result names that are under that category. An example can be like:

```yaml
results:
        - name: SIGNABLE-VCS
          value: ["FOO", "BAR"]
        - name: FOO
          value:
            src_type: git
            uri: git+https://github.com/foo/bar.git
            digest_ago: sha256
            digest: abc
        - name: SIGNABLE-OCI_IMAGE
          value: ["IMAGE1"]
        - name: IMAGE1
           value:
             name: gcr.io/somerepo/someimage
             digest: abc
             alg: sha256
```

And the result that contains the provenance still need to be aligned with the schema we defined in Chains. This way, users don't need to name the results.

> This is not chosen because Chains would know the differences between different types of artifacts.

Author: Done

This approach would require changes in Pipeline and also completion of [Trusted Resources](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/pull/739), so the detailed design can be scoped out in a future TEPs. However, the schemas for the provenance metadata should follow those defined in this TEP.

## Implementation Plan

The implementation plan has two main components:

> 1. upgrading Tekton Chains's Tekton Pipeline's version to v0.38, which TEP 75 and 76 will be supported behind alpha feature flag.

Author: > Thank you for this!
> 
> Even with TEP-0075 and TEP-0076 implemented, it seems to me that we still lack the ability to express that a result is signable on Tekton Pipeline side.
> 
> I don't like very much the idea of asking Task authors to write the name of the result to a result in a script. The alternative would be to name results with a known prefix, like 'ARTIFACT_INPUT_something_something`. That wouldn't look very nice but it would save the extra result writing in the step.

Thanks for the comments! I think the TEP design was originally based on 'ARTIFACT_INPUT_something_something`, but this reduces the flexibility that Task authors has to follow the naming in a particular format. And that approach can already be applied through a merged implementation https://github.com/tektoncd/chains/pull/465/files. I think the TEP is trying to group multiple infos in a structured way, so I think having two extra results wouldn't hurt that much considering the flexibility in naming it provides.

> 1. upgrading Tekton Chains's Tekton Pipeline's version to v0.38, which TEP 75 and 76 will be supported behind alpha feature flag.

Author: Thats right!

> 2. Iterate TaskRun / PipelineRun results for scanning the targeted results.

Author: I just reworded the No.2 bullet point. Let me know if that's clearer. Thanks!

As described above, users of Tekton Chains need to have two results, `ARTIFACT_INPUTS` and `ARTIFACT_OUTPUTS`, that are arrays of strings which stores the signable artifacts' result names:

```yaml
results:
  - name: ARTIFACT_INPUTS
    value: ["ARTIFACT-INPUT-NAME-1", "ARTIFACT-INPUT-NAME-1"]
  - name: ARTIFACT_OUTPUTS
    value: ["ARTIFACT-OUTPUT-NAME-1"]
```

And the signable target results need to follow the below schema:

```yaml
results:
  - name: ARTIFACT-NAME
    type: object
    description: |
      * uri: resource uri of the artifact. It can uniquely identify the artifact.
      * digest: revision digest in form algorithm:digest.
    properties:
      uri:
        type: string
      digest:
        type: string
```

In this way, every time when Tekton Chains tries to support a new type of artifacts, users can form in-toto provenance from this schema format, without needing to change Tekton Chains much. In general, Tekton Chains itself doesn't want to distinguish the types of artifacts from attestation generation point of view. The namings of these artifact results would be much more flexible as well.

### DigestSets

> The in-toto provenance supports digest in terms of [DigestSets](https://github.com/in-toto/attestation/blob/main/spec/field_types.md#field-type-definitions) for an artifact, which means users can provide different digests for different digest SHAs. This would be hard to support in Chains, as Results doesn't support nested objects yet. In the proposal, only one pair of SHA and digest can be provided. `DigestSets` can be supported when nested objects are supported in `Results`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The in-toto provenance supports digest in terms of [DigestSets](https://github.com/in-toto/attestation/blob/main/spec/field_types.md#field-type-definitions) for an artifact, which means users can provide different digests for different digest SHAs. Since Pipeline Results cannot support nested objects yet, Chains is unable to support them at the moment. In the proposal, only one pair of SHA and digest can be provided. `DigestSets` can be supported when nested objects are supported in `Results`.
```

Rephrased - it's not that this is hard for Chains to support, it's that we're limited by what Pipelines supports.

For the `outputs`, we are looking at the following support, as these are the artifact types supported in Artifact Registries. However, the list should definitely be expanded as this doc is spreading the discussions in the communities to see which should be prioritized. Currently, we have the following under considerations: Python, Maven, Go, NodeJS and OCI images. Note that OCI images are the ones we currently support.

#### Concrete Use Cases
All below examples will be generating in-toto attestation.
 1. Use Git commits as sources, and generates in-toto provenance for a TaskRun that builds an image.
   
    A Task example `without` structured results and params support can be like:
    ```
    apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1beta1
    kind: Task
    spec:
      params:
        - name: CHAINS-GIT_COMMIT
          type: string
          description: git commit sha
        - name: CHAINS-GIT_URL
          type: string
          description: git commit url
        - name: FOO_IMAGE
          type: string
        - description: artifact image
      ...
      results:

>         - name: IMAGE_DIGEST

Author: Added!

          description: digest of image
    ```
    A Task example `with` structured results and params support will be like:
    ```
    apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1beta1
    kind: Task
    spec:
      params:

>         - name: CHAINS-VCS

Author: SG! I'm changing the current way to have the naming to be not scoped only Chains. Another option is to we require users to provide a result in array type, with name consistent with the signable target, and have a list of result names that are under that category. An example can be like:
```
results:
        - name: SIGNABLE-VCS
          value: ["FOO", "BAR"]
        - name: FOO
           value:
             name: gcr.io/somerepo/someimage
             digest: abc
             alg: sha256
```
And the result that contains the provenance still need to be aligned with the schema we defined in Chains

          type: object
          description: |
            The source distribution
            * uri: resource uri of the git commit
            * digest: revision digest
            * alg: digest algorithm: sha256 etc.
            * src_type: source VCS type: git, hg, etc.
          properties:
          src_type:
            type: string
          uri:
            type: string
          alg:
            type: string
          digest:
            type: string
      ...
      results:

>         - name: CHAINS-OCI_IMAGE

Author: Ah yes I changed the naming again. I also wanted to discuss another proposal to let users don't have to name the results in a certain way

          type: object
          description: |
            The source distribution
            * name: name of the built image
            * digest: image digest
            * alg: digest algorithm: sha256 etc.
          properties:
          name:
            type: string
          digest:
            type: string

>           alg:

Reviewer 2: It's not clear that this is the algorithm of the digest. Maybe `digest_ago` is more specific? Alternatively `digest` could be a specially formatted string that includes both information, e.g. `<algo>:<digest>`.

Author: I changed the name to `digest_ago`. I'm still keeping them separate to give more flexibilities.

      type: string
    digest:
      type: string
    alg:
      type: string
    prov_type:
      type: string
```
#### Maven

Maven supports several for compiling and packaging. Compiling is done via `mvn compile` and produces `.class` files and packackging is done via `mvn package`, and [supports](https://maven.apache.org/pom.html#packaging) `pom`, `jar`, `maven-plugin`, `ejb`, `war`, `ear` and `rar`. Some plugins such as [Jib](https://github.com/GoogleContainerTools/jib/blob/master/jib-maven-plugin/README.md) can also help containerizing the compiled binaries into OCI images, but that can be covered by OCI image schema.

Therefore the schema for Maven packages is:
```
  - name: CHAINS-MAVEN_PACKAGE
    type: object
    description: |
      * name: name or url of the Maven package. Example: foo-v1.0.jar
      * digest: digest of the package
      * alg: digest algorithm: sha256 etc.
      * prov_type: 'input' or 'output', indicating provenance type.
    properties:
    name:
      type: string
    digest:
      type: string
    alg:
      type: string
    prov_type:
      type: string
```

#### Go

TODO

#### NodeJS

TODO

#### Parsing Results and Params from TaskRuns

> The defined results and params are in object types, and will be retrieved from TaskRun params and results. From the syntax of how the results / params look, the type of those, whether they are strings, objects or arrays can be determined. We need to validate the targets’ structures against defined result structures. Taking VCS as an example, when a `CHAINS-VCS` is found, the target needs to be an object, and it has to have at least the fields in defined `CHAINS-VCS` schema: `src_type`, `uri`, `alg` and `digest`. If additional fields are in the target, they will be ignored. The field validation rule follows the same pattern of duck typing mentioned in [TEP-0075](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/teps/0075-object-param-and-result-types.md). These individual fields will also be validated against supported formats.

Reviewer 4: Based on the discussion above, is the plan to still rely on user params or rather have the task output a result that expands the user input into a structured result that Chains can use?

Author: Thanks for reminding this! Now I removed all the proposals related to params.

#### Concrete Use Cases
All below examples will be generating in-toto attestation.
 1. Use Git commits as sources, and generates in-toto provenance for a TaskRun that builds an image.
   
    A Task example `without` structured results and params support can be like:
    ``` yaml
    apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1beta1
    kind: Task
    spec:
      params:
        - name: CHAINS-GIT_COMMIT
          type: string
          description: git commit sha
        - name: CHAINS-GIT_URL
          type: string
          description: git commit url
        - name: FOO_IMAGE
          type: string
        - description: artifact image
      ...
      results:
        - name: IMAGE_DIGEST
          description: digest of image
        - name: IMAGE_URL
          description: url of image
    ```
    A Task example `with` structured results support will be like:
    ``` yaml
    apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1beta1
    kind: Task
    spec:
      ...
      results:

>         - name: SIGNABLE-VCS_$(NAME)

Reviewer: is `$(NAME)` actual interpolation, or just a placeholder?

Author: Ah this is just a placeholder in the doc.

The workflow for the targeted results in Chains is like the following:
```
(TaskRun results) —-> (Scanned by Chains controller, targets are collected) —> (Targets are parsed and validated and matched against with defined result and param structures)  —-> (Chains controller sign the signable targets and put into intoto attestations)
```
Tekton Chains will follow [TEP 0075](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/teps/0075-object-param-and-result-types.md) and [TEP 0076](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/teps/0076-array-result-types.md) and support the sets of json schemas and described in the documents. In this proposal, the expected formats of results are also defined.

> As mentioned above, the signable targets can be split into inputs (sources) and outputs (artifacts). It's important that Chains are able to determine which signable targets are inputs, and which are outputs. We can enforce all the schemas need to have a string field `prov_type`, which can be either `input` or `output`, which indicates Chains to either put them into `subjects` or `materials`.

Reviewer: I'm having trouble following how we're distinguishing inputs and outputs at the moment.

e.g. how would we distinguish "I used this image" vs "I pushed this image"?

Author: I'm trying to say that the result should have `prov_type` to indicate this. Are you trying to address another thing?

Author: Discussed offline. We are going to have SIGNABLE_INPUTS and SIGNABLE_OUTPUTs in results

### Notes and Caveats

When these well defined structures grow as richer provenance are pursued, the size of the structure can eventually grow beyond the limit of the container termination message. [TEP 0086](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/pull/521) is addressing this issue.

## Design Details

### Signable Targets

All signable targets should be provided in a structure that is well defined in the proposal. If any field is missed, the signable targets will be skipped and an error will be thrown. The users need to follow the naming pattern in order the result objects can be captured.

#### Optional Alternatives for Schemas
It will be more flexible if users can define the provenance following the defined schemas, but don't necessarily have to follow the naming patterns. Users can provide a result in array type, with name consistent with the signable target, and have a list of result names that are under that category. An example can be like:
``` yaml
results:
        - name: SIGNABLE-VCS

>           value: ["FOO", "BAR"]

Reviewer: 2 alternatives that are probably worth exploring:

1. Consolidate to 2 results - `INPUTS` / `OUTPUTS` (similar to how `IMAGES` is used today)
2. Don't rely on results at all and instead introduce similar fields into the TaskRun status.

I think my preference long-term would be 2 - though we can also hash out what intermediate steps we would need to get there.

Author: 1. Are you trying to suggest something like this?
```
results:
- name: SIGNABLE_INPUTS
          type: array
```
```
results:
- name: SIGNABLE_OUTPUTS
          type: array
```

Then we have this in TaskRun:
```
results:
- name: SIGNABLE_INPUTS
   value:
   - RESULT_1
   - RESULT_2

- name: SIGNABLE_OUTPUTS
   value:
   - RESULT_3
   - RESULT_4

```
But I think it still matters if we can know the type of the signable target (mave or python), and that would involve something like this with nested objects:
- name: SIGNABLE_INPUTS
   value:
    - name: RESULT_2
       signable_type: VCS
    - name: RESULT_3
       signable_type: IMAGE

Considering nested objects are out of scope for TEP 75, I would probably consider as future support options, but we can also embed this nested object support into option 2.

The current schema has a `signable_type` field that indicates whether the result is an input or an output.

2. I agree that this should be either ultimately put under a TaskRun field or getting this assured that the results are generated by some trusted tasks

Author: Discussed offline to refactor the schema. See doc for details

      * prov_type: 'input' or 'output', indicating provenance type.
    properties:
    name:
      type: string
    digest:
      type: string
    digest_ago:
      type: string
    prov_type:
      type: string
```

#### Go

TODO

#### NodeJS

TODO

#### Parsing Results from TaskRuns

The defined results are in object types, and will be retrieved from TaskRun results. From the syntax of how the results look, the type of those, whether they are strings, objects or arrays can be determined. We need to validate the targets’ structures against defined result structures. Taking VCS as an example, when a `SIGNABLE-VCS` is found, the target needs to be an object, and it has to have at least the fields in defined `SIGNABLE-VCS` schema: `src_type`, `uri`, `alg` and `digest`. If additional fields are in the target, they will be ignored. The field validation rule follows the same pattern of duck typing mentioned in [TEP-0075](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/teps/0075-object-param-and-result-types.md). These individual fields will also be validated against supported formats.

#### Storage of Signable Target Provenance Schema

> Each target provenance schema will be stored in a file as a serialized json object. They will be included into the Chains controller image. A singleton variable will load them for later use. The naming will be the type hinting marker. For example, VCS schema file will be called `vcs` and it should be stored in the file in such format:

Reviewer: This is glossing over a lot 😅 

How would provenance be collected from Runs and be provided to Chains? Is https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/teps/0086-changing-the-way-result-parameters-are-stored.md a prerequisite here, or are you thinking of a different mechanism?

Author: I'm removing this section since we are only having one schema, so storage of those schemas may not be needed for now
